---
title: sabre/http 3.0.0 release
product: http
sidebar: none
date: "2014-09-23T20:49:01+00:00"
tags:
    - http
    - release
---

We just released sabre/http 3.0.0.

We introduced several API breaking changes, so a major version change was
warranted.

In particular, we modified the API to be closer to the draft version of
[psr/http][2].

psr/http is an upcoming standard for PHP development that should unify how we
represent HTTP requests and responses in PHP.

There were several good ideas in this spec, in particular how HTTP headers
are treated, especially when there are multiple headers with the same name,
which is something sabre/http dealt poorly with (not at all).

## Changes

* Switched to a PSR-4 directory structure in `lib/`. This means all classes
  are now in `lib/` instead of `lib/Sabre/HTTP`. This should not change a
  thing if you use the composer autoloader.
* `::setHeaders()` used to delete all previous http headers. This is no longer
  the case, new headers will simply be added to the existing ones.
* Added `::getHeaderAsArray()`. This method returns a single http header. If
  multiple headers with the same name were specified, each value will be an
  item in this array.
* If you use `::getHeader()`, and there were more than 1 http header with that
  name, we now concatenate all these headers with a comma (`,`).
* `::addHeader()` is new, and will preserve any existing header with that
  name. Instead, a second header will be added with the same name and a new
  value.
* `::getHeaders()` will now return each header value as an array.
* The `Client` class now only follows redirects to HTTP and HTTPS urls.
* `Util::negotiate` is deprecated, use `Util::negotiateContentType` instead.
* The `Client` class can now follow redirects, even if the `open_basedir`
  setting is turned on.

## Upgrading

If you are using sabre/http solely through sabredav, don't upgrade yet unless
you are using the latest development version. If you use sabre/http
independently, ensure that the relevant line in your composer.json looks like
this:

    "require" : {
        "sabre/http" : "~3.0.0"
    }

And run `composer update sabre/http` afterwards.

## No full psr/http compliance

I've matched the Request and Response to behave closer to the draft psr-http
draft, _but_ I didn't go all the way!

I strongly disapprove of how message bodies are represented. The PSR
introduces an object to wrap PHP streams, that has severely less features,
and due to its design it's incompatible with regular PHP streams and doesn't
cover all our use cases. All under the pretense that PHP streams are hard to
use.

Unless that's fixed, we'll not be fully supporting the specification, but it's
still a draft, and there's still time.

Full changelog can be found on [Github][1]

[1]: https://github.com/sabre-io/http/blob/3.0.0/ChangeLog.md
[2]: https://github.com/php-fig/fig-standards/blob/master/proposed/http-message.md
