---
title: Baïkal 0.4.0 released
product: baikal 
sidebar: none
date: "2016-03-15T17:40:12-04:00"
tags:
    - baikal
    - release
---

We just released Baïkal 0.4.0. This release contains a number of changes that
should improve the system for a number of users. The 0.3.x range of releases
had seen a number of stability problems, due to a relatively big sabre/dav
upgrade.

I'm attributing the issues to growing pains. With the 0.4.0 release we hope
that the most of the common issues are solved. This release contains the
following changes:

* SQlite users had issues syncing. This was due to a newly added feature
  (sync reports). Upgrading to 0.4.0 will repair your database schema and
  should make existing setups sync again.
* The installation threw an error if you didn't have the Sqlite PDO PHP
  extension installed.
* We added the "Property storage" plugin. This enables a range of features
  for clients, such as availability, default alarms and "me card".
* We added the Scheduling plugin, which adds scheduling and free-busy.
  Enabling this should also solve a problem with iCal, which behaved badly
  without this plugin.
* We removed the "admin locking" features. In the past it was possible to
  disable the Baïkal admin by removing the `ENABLE_ADMIN` file from the
  `Specific/` folder. This feature is now no longer supported, and users
  should instead use their Webserver configuration to block access to
  the admin.

Read the [upgrade instructions here][1]. Full changelog can be found on [Github][2]

[1]: /baikal/upgrade/ "Upgrade instructions"
[2]: https://github.com/fruux/Baikal/blob/0.4.0/CHANGELOG.md "Change log"
