---
title: Upgrading from SabreDAV 1.2 to 1.3
layout: default
permalink: dav/upgrade/1.2-to-1.3/
---

A few changes were needed in SabreDAV to improve future compatibility,
unfortunately this breaks backwards compatibility. The changes are minimal
though.

Etags must be surrounded by double-quotes
-----------------------------------------

This was a bug in SabreDAV since the start. All Etags must be surrounded by
double-quotes everywhere.  The best way to implement this was to enforce all
getETag methods to include the quotes.

If your code looked like this:

    function getETag() {

        return $this->myETag;

    }

ensure it's changed to this:

    function getETag() {

        return '"' . $this->myETag . '"';

    }


Sabre_DAV_PermissionDenied and Sabre_DAV_IDirectory are removed
---------------------------------------------------------------

The `Sabre_DAV_PermissionDenied` class is replaced by the
`Sabre_DAV_Forbidden` class.

The `Sabre_DAV_IDirectory` interface is replaced by the
`Sabre_DAV_ICollection` interface.

If you use either of these, this affects you. These classes were already 
deprecated in 1.1.1, but now finally removed.


Sabre_DAV_ICollection interface has nodeExists method
-----------------------------------------------------

If you rolled your custom Collections, and you directly 'implemented'
`Sabre_DAV_ICollection`, without using one of the helper classes, you must now
implement `nodeExists($path)`. 

This method takes a path-part, and must return true or false.


beforeMethod and unknownMethod now receive new arguments
--------------------------------------------------------

If you are a plugin developer, and rely on either of these events, this is
relevant to you.

Both the beforeMethod and unknownMethod event now receive a `$method` and
`$uri` argument.

You should now use this `$uri` argument, instead of relying on 
`Sabre_DAV_Server::getRequestUri()`.
 
While it won't affect you in the short-term, if future plugins are going to
re-route requests to new uri's, the getRequestUri() method will return the 
original uri, and not the uri it was rerouted to.


ObjectTree now cached
---------------------

If you are a plugin developer, this might be relevant.

ObjectTree now caches nodes where possible. This is a huge performance 
increase, especially for complex systems such as the CalDAV plugin.

The cache is per-request, and not stored in an external cache system.

If you were manually adding new nodes on the fly, deleting, copying or 
moving from your plugin, make sure you clear the cache.

To do this, call `$tree->markDirty($path);` Where $path is the subtree you want
to evict from the cache.

To take advantage of the cache, use the new Tree methods:

* `Tree::delete($path);`
* `Tree::getChildren($path);`
* `Tree::markDirty($path);`

If you developed your custom tree, using `Sabre_DAV_ObjectTree` as the 
parent-class, and overriding either `copy()`, `move()` or `copyNode()`, also
make sure you call markDirty($path) after any tree-mutation.
