---
title: Upgrading from SabreDAV 1.3 to 1.4
layout: default
permalink: dav/upgrade/1.3-to-1.4/
---

In order to add the new SabreDAV features in 1.4, it was needed to break API
compatibility in a number of places.

This document describes each. Items in this list are ordered by how likely you
are to be affected by it. Every section starts with a paragraph explaining why
it would be relevant to you.


Changed handing of 'guessing the base uri'
------------------------------------------

Every SabreDAV version before 1.4.2 had a bug where in some circumstances it
would be possible for users to delete an entire directory tree, if no fixed
base uri was set and the user tried to access a file ending in ".php".

This functionality has been changed to be a bit 'dumber' in guessing the base
uri. For some users an error might occur when the server is accessed directly
through a server.php (or similar named file) and no `/` is set at the end.

You are strongly encouraged to simply set the base uri manually by calling
`setBaseUri` on the `Sabre_DAV_Server` object.

Sabre_DAV_Auth_Backend* API changed
-----------------------------------

This is important if you created a custom authentication backend.

The `Sabre_DAV_Auth_Backend_Abstract` class is now removed. If you extended that
class directly, you must now implement the `Sabre_DAV_Auth_IBackend` interface
instead.

The interface no longer has a getUsers method, and you can remove this method
as well.

The 'getCurrentUser' method must now no longer return an array with user
information, but only a single username instead.

If you extended `Sabre_DAV_Auth_Backend_AbstractDigest`, the API has also
slightly changed. The `getUserInfo()` method has been removed, and a
`getDigestHash` method has been added to replace it.

This method must return the 'A1' digest hash. Before this was returned by
`getUserInfo` as part of the array, but this method must only return this
string.


New security model for CalDAV
-----------------------------

This section is relevant to you if you're a CalDAV user and you're not using
`Sabre_CalDAV_Server`, but a customized setup instead.

SabreDAV now has partly support for WebDAV [ACL (rfc3744)](/dav/acl). This is
added through a plugin (`Sabre_DAVACL_Plugin`). If this plugin is not added to
your server, all users will be able to access and modify all other users'
calendars.  If this is an issue for you, simply add the ACL plugin to your
server:

    $server->addPlugin(new Sabre_DAVACL_Plugin());

Note again: `Sabre_CalDAV_Server` adds this plugin by default, so you won't
have to worry about it. 


Locks backends API changes
--------------------------

This is relevant to you if you built your own locks backend class.

There were a few bugs in how SabreDAV handled looks in child objects. In order
to fix this an API change was needed.

The `getLocks()` method in `Sabre_DAV_Locks_Backend_Abstract` now takes a second
argument, `$returnChildLocks`.

If this argument is set to true, your backend should also return any lock
that's deep within the tree.

For example, a node at uri `directory/sub/file.txt` has a write lock. If
`getLocks('directory',true)` is called, your backend should also return the
child's lock.


Sabre_DAV_Locks_Backend_FS now deprecated
-----------------------------------------

This is relevant to you, if you use `Sabre_DAV_Locks_Backend_FS`.

Due to a locking bug it was needed to recursively look for locks on nodes. 
Because of how `Sabre_DAV_Locks_Backend_FS` works, this was very hard to 
implement without a major performance penalty.

So this backend still contains the locking bug, that can be described as
follows:

If a file is locked deep in a directory tree, it's possible still to delete
(any of) its parents.

To remedy this, you should switch to one of the following backends:

* `Sabre_DAV_Locks_Backend_PDO`
* `Sabre_DAV_Locks_Backend_File`

The 'File' backend was created to replace the FS backend, and stores all the
locking information in a single file. For performance and stability reasons 
you are highly encouraged to use PDO instead. PDO stores locks in a MySQL
or SQLite database, and is therefore much more robust. 


Office 2000 & 2003 compatibility
--------------------------------

This is relevant to you if you use Office as a WebDAV client.

Since 1.4 SabreDAV returns the `{DAV:}lockroot` element, according to the 
specification. It was reported that Office doesn't like this property
very much, and breaks.

We want to be compliant with the standard, so SabreDAV does return the 
`{DAV:}lockroot` element by default. If you want to turn this off, you can do
so with the following line of code:

    Sabre_DAV_Property_LockDiscovery::$hideLockRoot = true;


Principal system and Authentication system are decoupled (part 1)
-----------------------------------------------------------------

This is important to you, if you're using the CalDAV system, and you're using
the standard PDO backends, or `Sabre_CalDAV_Server`.

This change was needed, because principals needed many new features, and it
seemed like a bad idea to build it into the Sabre_DAV_Auth system. The result
is that if you don't use principals (basically if you don't use CalDAV) the
authentication system is more lightweight.

There are two new database tables. `principals` and `groupmembers`. Both
MUST exist. 

MySQL:

    CREATE TABLE principals (
            id INTEGER UNSIGNED NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT,
            uri VARCHAR(100) NOT NULL,
            email VARCHAR(80),
            displayname VARCHAR(80),
            UNIQUE(uri)
    );

    CREATE TABLE groupmembers (
            id INTEGER UNSIGNED NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT,
            principal_id INTEGER UNSIGNED NOT NULL,
            member_id INTEGER UNSIGNED NOT NULL,
            UNIQUE(principal_id, member_id)
    );

SQLite:

    CREATE TABLE principals (
            id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY ASC, 
            uri TEXT,
            email TEXT,
            displayname TEXT,
            UNIQUE(uri)
    );

    CREATE TABLE groupmembers (
            id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY ASC,
            principal_id INTEGER,
            member_id INTEGER,
            UNIQUE(principal_id, member_id)
    );

Your users also require entries in the principals table now.

The easiest way to go about this (if you used the standard PDO classes) is 
a query like this (mysql example):

    INSERT INTO principals (uri, email, displayname)
      SELECT CONCAT('principals/', username), email, username FROM users 

So also keep in mind for the future that if you add a new user to your system,
an entry must be added to the users table for your user to log in, and an 
entry must be added for the principals table for the user to show up in the tree.


Principal and Authentication systems are decoupled (part 2)
-----------------------------------------------------------

If you either constructed a custom authentication backend, or if you
instantiated Sabre_DAV_Auth_Backend yourself *and* you are a CalDAV user,
this is relevant to you.

The principal system (which is responsible for listing users) is now no longer
managed by Sabre_DAV_Auth_Backend_, but Sabre_DAVACL_PrincipalBackend_ instead.

If you used `Sabre_DAV_Auth_Backend_PDO`, you must now also instantiate
`Sabre_DAVACL_PrincipalBackend_PDO`.

If you created your own Authentication backend, you must now also create your
own Principal backend. Implement `Sabre_DAVACL_IPrincipalBackend` for this.

Note that the principal system also has group support (the membership methods).
Implementing this is optional, but required if you'd like calendar delegation
support.


Principal and Authentication systems are decoupled (part 3)
-----------------------------------------------------------

If you used any of the following classes, this is relevant to you.

The following classes have been renamed and moved from Sabre_DAV_Auth to
Sabre_DAVACL:

| From							       | To |
| ------------------------------------ | -- |
| `Sabre_DAV_Auth_Principal`           | `Sabre_DAVACL_IPrincipal` if you have custom-built principal classes. |
| `Sabre_DAV_Auth_Principal`           | `Sabre_DAVACL_Principal` If you need the default principal class. |
| `Sabre_DAV_Auth_Principal`	       | `Sabre_CalDAV_Principal_User` For the CalDAV specific principal (with delegation support). |
| `Sabre_DAV_Auth_PrincipalCollection` | `Sabre_DAVACL_PrincipalCollection` For the standard principal collection. |
| `Sabre_DAV_Auth_PrincipalCollection` | `Sabre_CalDAV_Principal_Collection` For the CalDAV-specific principal collection (with delegation support). |


Principal and Authentication systems are decoupled (part 4)
-----------------------------------------------------------

This section is relevant to you, if you're instantiating either of the
following classes yourself:

* `Sabre_CalDAV_CalendarRootNode`
* `Sabre_CalDAV_UserCalendars`
* `Sabre_CalDAV_Calendar`

In short, if you instantiated any of these objects yourself, the constructor
signature slightly changed.

Before it needed an instance of `Sabre_DAV_Auth_Backend_Abstract`, but now it
needs an instance of `Sabre_DAVACL_IPrincipalBackend`.
