---
title: Upgrading from SabreDAV 1.5 to 1.6
layout: default
permalink: dav/upgrade/1.5-to-1.6/
---

To keep a clean codebase, and not one that's stuck in the past compatbility
breaks are needed.

1.6 is leap forward in a number of areas, so as a result there are also an
number of breaks.

If for some reason you cannot upgrade to 1.6, 1.5 will be maintained for as
long as there's demand.

This document describes the breaks. Items in this list are ordered by how
likely you are to be affected by it. Every section starts with a paragraph
explaining why it would be relevant to you.

But we'll start with the good news.

New features
------------

We just released SabreDAV 1.6.0. This version contains a bunch of new
features, and a ton of "under the hood" changes. It is fair to say that this
release has seen the most effort yet.

The main changes are:

* SabreDAV now requires PHP 5.3
* SabreDAV is now a composer package. Check out [getcomposer.org][1] to find
  out what that means.
* Support for 'make this my card' in OS/X Addressbook.app.
* Support for the 'free-busy-query' report. This allows people with support
  clients to find out if other users are available for meetings. Note that
  this is not the same feature used by iCal to show free-busy reports. The
  report iCal uses will be added in a later version.
* Correct support for the calendar-query filter (now takes recurring events
  into consideration), as well as expanding of events.
* SabreDAV now contains functionality to send emails for events, such as
  inviting, accepting an event, declining an event and deleting an event. To
  use this, you must setup the [IMipHandler](/dav/imiphandler). This feature
  is only used by iCal, because it wrongly assumed that the server would
  handle emails, even when the server doesn't advertise for this feature. So
  using this feature is a workaround to invitation bugs in iCal.
* A ton of improvements in the Browser plugin. This should make it easier to
  perform some management tasks, such as adding calendars and addressbooks.
* Support for adminstrators. If you add principal-urls to
  `Sabre_DAVACL_Plugin::$adminPrincipals`, these principals will receive every
  permission, everywhere.
* Improvements in Sabre_VObject to aid with parsing complex iCalendar data,
  such as recurrence and turning a regular iCalendar file into a FREEBUSY
  report.

A big release like this also means that there's a fair number of compatibility
breaks, which may especially affect you if you customized your SabreDAV setup.

Read the full [Changelog][2] for more details.


SabreDAV now requires PHP 5.3
-----------------------------

There are a number of features that depend on functionality that has been
introduced with PHP 5.3. Among these items are the DateTime-related additions
and closures.

If your system runs an older version than 5.2, you must stick with the SabreDAV
1.5.* versions. 1.5.* will still be actively maintained, but will not receive 
any new features.


Database changes
----------------

If you use `Sabre_DAVACL_PrincipalBackend_PDO` or have a 'principals' table,
you must run the following script to keep it compatible:

    -- MySQL
    ALTER TABLE principals ADD vcardurl VARCHAR(80);

    -- SQLite
    ALTER TABLE principals ADD vcardurl TEXT;

This new field stores a url to a vcard associated with a specific principal.
This enables the "Make this My Card" feature in OS/X's Addressbook.


If you're authenticated, you can read other people\'s FREE-BUSY information
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Since 1.6 support for the 'freebusy' report is added. The default that was
added was to give any use who's authenticated, access to these reports.

So although no calendars are shared, it is shared when people have events
scheduled at certain times.


lib/Sabre.includes.php is deprecated
------------------------------------

Every package now has a specific includes file:

* Sabre/HTTP/includes.php
* Sabre/DAV/includes.php
* Sabre/VObject/includes.php
* Sabre/DAVACL/includes.php
* Sabre/CalDAV/includes.php
* Sabre/CardDAV/includes.php

The 'old' includes file only includes the first two items. In 1.7 this includes
file will be removed.


Sabre_DAV_Exception_FileNotFound is now Sabre_DAV_Exception_NotFound
--------------------------------------------------------------------

We renamed this exception because it makes more sense.
The `Sabre_DAV_Exception_FileNotFound` exception still exists, but
it extends `Sabre_DAV_Exception_NotFound`.

The old exception will be removed in version 1.7.


Sabre_CalDAV_Server is deprecated
---------------------------------

This class always kind of served as an example class to implement custom server
classes, and was intentionally inflexible. In 1.6 this is is marked as
deprecated, and it will be removed in 1.7.

To fix this, we suggest users to simply copy the old class, and change the
class name. If you don't want to do this, take a look at the
"calendarserver.php" file in the examples/ directory. This file contains a
full explanation of how to setup a calendar server.  


Sabre_DAVACL_IPrincipalBackend has new methods
----------------------------------------------

The `Sabre_DAVACL_IPrincipalBackend` interface now has two new methods:

* updatePrincipal
* searchPrincipals

Refer to the interface for documentation about these two new methods. This may
also apply to you if you extend `Sabre_DAVACL_PrincipalBackend_PDO`.


Removed Sabre_DAV_ILockable
---------------------------

Before 1.6 it was possible to implement locking-functionality directly in
nodes, by implementing Sabre_DAV_ILockable. This was found to be problematic
and barely used, so this functionality is completely removed.

If you relied on this feature, you have no ther option but to migrate your
custom implementation to a `Sabre_DAV_Locks_Backend_Abstract`-based class.

If you have trouble with this, head over to the [mailing list][3], we're we'll
gladly figure out a solution for your use-case.


Validation of iCalendar objects no longer happens in Sabre_CalDAV_Calendar
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

A syntax check of iCalendar objects used to be done in:

* `Sabre_CalDAV_Calendar::createFile` and
* `Sabre_CalDAV_CalendarObject::put` 

This functionality has been moved to `Sabre_CalDAV_Plugin`. The new check is a
bit more strict, so this should be very helpful to reduce corruption of data.


Added method to Sabre_DAVACL_IACL interface
-------------------------------------------

If you implemented `Sabre_DAVACL_IACL` directly, you must now also implement a
getSupportedPrivilegeSet method. This method allows you to specify a custom set
of priviliges per node.

To simply retain the old behaviour, you can simply return null. This will cause
the default permission set to kick in.


Removed classes in CalDAV plugin
--------------------------------

* `Sabre_CalDAV_ICalendarUtil` contained functions to validate iCalendar
  objects, as well as a utility to convert iCalendar objects to a simple xml
  format. Neither was needed anymore, and both were poorly implemented. All
  this type of functionality is now going to the Sabre_VObject package, but
  there's no alternative to convert to the xml format.
* `Sabre_CalDAV_XMLUtil` contained various functions to parse iCalendar dates,
  as well as certain CalDAV requests. This functionality has also all been
  moved to the VObject package. If you just want to parse iCalendar dates,
  take a look at `Sabre_VObject_DateTimeParser`.
* `Sabre_CalDAV_Exception_InvalidICalendarObject` was removed as well.


Renamed some VObject classes
----------------------------

  * `Sabre_VObject_Element_MultiDateTime` is now `Sabre_VObject_Property_MultiDateTime`
  * `Sabre_VObject_Element_DateTime` is now `Sabre_VObject_Property_DateTime`

The old classes still exist, and still work but will be removed in a future version.


calendars/username now contains an outbox node
----------------------------------------------

The `calendars/[username]` collection always listed just the users' calendars.
Now it also contains an 'outbox', which is currently used by iCal to send event
invitations. In the future this outbox will be used more heavily to support
other scheduling-related features.

[1]: https://getcomposer.org/ 
[2]: https://github.com/fruux/sabre-dav/blob/1.6.0/ChangeLog
[3]: http://groups.google.com/group/sabredav-discuss

