---
title: Upgrading from SabreDAV 1.6 to 1.7
layout: default
permalink: dav/upgrade/1.6-to-1.7/
---

SabreDAV 1.7 is released, and as usual this brings a couple of changes to the
table. If you are migrating from SabreDAV 1.6, this document is for you!

We make a concious decision to always break a few API's we are unhappy with, so
we don't get stuck in the past.

This time around there's a fairly significant list of changes. The sections
below are ordered by how likely you will come across an issue.

If upgrading from 1.6 makes you uncomfortable, we will keep maintaining the 1.6
branch for 12 months.

New features
------------

First the good news:

* A lot of REPORT queries got a lot faster. Especially some CalDAV-related
  requests can be exponentially faster. Some larger operations sped up from
  several minutes, to several seconds.
* The VObject library has spun off into a separate project: [sabre/vobject][1].
* Experimental support for [caldav-sharing](/dav/caldav-sharing) and
  caldav-notifications.
* Added a [vcard export plugin](/dav/vcf-export-plugin), similar to the
  [iCalendar export plugin](/dav/ics-export-plugin).
* Added a bunch of free-busy reports that now make it possible for iCal to use
  them.
* Added support for a [PATCH format](/dav/http-patch).
* Switched to using the [Composer autoloader][2].
* Stronger validation of both iCalendar and vCard files.
* Support for `Brief` and `Prefer: return-minimal` headers.


API breaks
----------

### Default CalDAV MySQL/SqLite backend needs upgrade

In order to make the CalDAV backend faster, it was needed to add a few more
database fields. These fields ensure that the heavier CalDAV queries are
indexable.

A migration script has been included in the distribution, it can be found in
bin/migrate17.php.

Note that if you use non-default table names, or a custom CalDAV backend,
this script will not work!

You should make absolutely sure that a backup of your database is created
first. No warranty is provided, although both SQLite and MySQL have been
tested.

To get information about how to call the script, simply run it:

    php bin/migrate17.php

This will display a help screen.


### Composer package name changed

This only applies to you, if you installed sabredav using 'composer'.

Starting 1.7, the composer package name is no longer 'evert/sabredav', but
'sabre/dav'. The best way to migrate, is to remove the old package completely,
and then re-install 'sabre/dav'.


### Now using composer for autoloading

The autoloader in `lib/Sabre/autoload.php` is now deprecated, and will be
removed in a future version of sabredav.

Instead, you should include `vendor/autoload.php`.


### VObject library moved to a separate package and now uses namespaces

The VObject library was useful enough to spawn into a separate project.
One of the major things that changed in this library, is that PHP 5.3
namespaces are now used throughout.

This means that wherever in your code you used:

    Sabre_VObject_Reader::read($str);

The correct syntax would now be:

    \Sabre\VObject\Reader::read($str);

Or:

    use Sabre\VObject;

    VObject\Reader::read($str);

This applies to all VObject classes.

Moving it into a separate project has another effect. Even though the
VObject library is still included in the zip, the sourcecode can now be
found under:

    vendor/sabre/vobject

This directory structure is automatically generated by composer.
The required composer files are included in the zip distribution.

Note that the move to namespaces is indeed a sign of things to come for
SabreDAV itself as well. In a next version SabreDAV will fully switch to
namespaces.


### PEAR packages are now deprecated

For those 3 people who still used this, from this point forward, the pear
packages will no longer be created. They will be for the 1.6 range of packages.


### Sabre_CalDAV_Server has been removed

This only applies to you if you used this class.

The `Sabre_CalDAV_Server` script had already been deprecated for some time, but
it has now been fully removed.

The original intention was to show it as an example of how to extend
`Sabre_DAV_Server`, but as feature requests came in for more flexibility, the
best course of action was to simply remove it altogether.

For an alternative way to setup your CalDAV server, have a look at the examples
directory.


### lib/Sabre.includes.php has been removed 

The `lib/Sabre.includes.php` was deprecated earlier, and has now been removed
from the SabreDAV distribution. Every individual package does still have
an includes file, so if you prefer this way of loading in PHP files, use:

* `lib/Sabre/HTTP/includes.php`
* `lib/Sabre/DAV/includes.php`
* `lib/Sabre/VObject/includes.php`
* `lib/Sabre/CalDAV/includes.php`
* `lib/Sabre/CardDAV/includes.php`


### CalDAV Backend API design

This only applies to you if you created a custom CalDAV backend. If you use
the default PDO class, you can skip this section.

In SabreDAV 1.6 the backend base class for backends was
`Sabre_CalDAV_Backend_Abstract`. While this class still exists, it not
implements the `Sabre_CalDAV_Backend_BackendInterface` interface.

The interface, and abstract class now have a new method: `calendarQuery`. This
method is called for the caldav-query REPORT and free-busy operations.

You must implement this. However, `Sabre_CalDAV_Backend_Abstract` has a
default implementation.

If you're having performance issues with these operations, it's recommended to
override the default calendarQuery method. The PDO backend does this to
optimize common queries.


### Removed Sabre_DAV_Directory and Sabre_DAV_SimpleDirectory

If you still used either of these classes, you should now use
`Sabre_DAV_Collection` and `Sabre_DAV_SimpleCollection`.


### urn:DAV is no longer used

This only applies to you, if you ever used 'urn:DAV' in your code as an xml
namespace.

In the past the PHP xml parser had a bug, that prevented us from using 'DAV:'
as an xml namespace. To work around this, a pre-processor changed all
references to this namespace into 'urn:DAV'.

This is no longer an issue in PHP 5.3, which is also the minimum required PHP
version, so this workaround is now removed.

**EDIT**: This was re-introduced in version 1.7.4 as there were still certain
setups that had issues with this. The new decision is to wait till 2015 to
try and take this out again.


### Sabre_CalDAV_Schedule_IMip has been slightly modified

This only applies to you, if you subclassed `Sabre_CalDAV_Schedule_IMip`.

The `sendMessage` method in `Sabre_CalDAV_Schedule_IMip` now has an extra
argument. If you extended this class, be sure to add it to your
implemenation too.


### Sabre_CalDAV_ICalendar interface now has a new method

This only applies to you, if you directly implemented `Sabre_CalDAV_ICalendar`.

The `calendarQuery` method has been added to the `Sabre_CalDAV_ICalendar` class.
If you implemented this class directory, you must add it.

The default implementations delegate this functionality to the CalDAV backend
classes. If you did indeed roll your own, you should take a look at these
implementations on how to properly implement this method.

[1]: https://github.com/sabre-io/vobject
[2]: http://getcomposer.org/
