---
title: Upgrading from SabreDAV 1.7 to 1.8
layout: default
permalink: dav/upgrade/1.7-to-1.8/
---

Only a month after the 1.7 release, 1.8 now follows.

The #1 biggest difference is that we completely moved from the old
'prefix-style' namespacing, to true PHP 5.3 namespaces.

We wanted to get this release quickly out, so we can easily maintain 1.7 and
1.8 side-by-side. They should not diverge much feature-wise.

This document helps explaining the differences, and how to upgrade.

API breaks
----------

### We're now using PHP 5.3 namespaces

What does this mean? Simple: wherever you wrote `Sabre_DAV_Server` before, you
now write `Sabre\DAV\Server`. This applies to every class in the SabreDAV
codebase.

Check out the [PHP documentation][1] to figure out what benefits this brings.

So for most classnames this is simply a change from `_` to ` \ `, but there are
a few exceptions.

A class named `MyPackage_Abstract` is a legal class in PHP, but
`MyPackage\Abstract` is not, because the `abstract` here is a keyword. So a few
classes have gotten new names.

| Before                             | After   |
| ---------------------------------- | --------|
| `Sabre_DAV_Locks_Backend_Abstract` | `Sabre\DAV\Locks\Backend\Abstractbackend` and `Sabre\DAV\Locks\Backend\BackendInterface` |
| `Sabre_DAV_Auth_IBackend`          | `Sabre\DAV\Auth\Backend\BackendInterface` |
| `Sabre_CalDAV_Backend_Abstract`    | `Sabre\CalDAV\Backend\AbstractBackend`    |
| `Sabre_CardDAV_Backend_Abstract`   | `Sabre\CardDAV\Backend\AbstractBackend` and `Sabre\CardDAV\Backend\BackendInterface` |
| `Sabre_DAVACL_IPrincipalBackend`   | `Sabre\DAVACL\PrincipalBackend\BackendInterface` |

As you can see we also improved consistency. Every 'backend package' now has a
`BackendInterface` as well as an `AbstractBackend`.


### Changed a few constructor signatures

This is only relevant to you if you instantiated one of the following classes
directly:

* `Sabre\CalDAV\Calendar`
* `Sabre\CalDAV\SharedCalendar`
* `Sabre\CalDAV\ShareableCalendar`

All three of these now have a slightly different constructor signature. They no
longer need the PrincipalBackend, and receive more principal information through
the constructor.

Make sure you read the updated API documentation and fix this.

### Sabre\CalDAV\ISharedCalendar now has a getShares() method

Just like `Sabre\CalDAV\IShareableCalendar`, the `ISharedCalendar` now also
has a getShares() method.

With this method, it is possible for clients to find out to whom a calendar
is shared with (aside from themselves). Returning something is optional, but
this method *must* be implemented.

The other implication is that if you implement
`Sabre\CalDAV\Backend\SharingSupport`, the getShares() method will now also be
called by non-owners.

[1]: https://php.net/manual/en/language.namespaces.php 
