---
title: Upgrading from SabreDAV 2.0 to 2.1
layout: default
permalink: dav/upgrade/2.0-to-2.1/
---

sabre/dav 2.1 has a number of new features, and as usual, a number of backwards
compatibility breaks.

This page lists them all.

New features
------------

* We finally have support for CalDAV scheduling, as defined in
  [rfc6638][rfc6638]. Among other things, this means that you can invite
  people on your sabredav server, and see attendence status automatically
  update. Many CalDAV clients support this, and will also now automatically
  provide "Accept" and "Decline" interfaces when new invites are sent. This
  also enables attendees on iOS for the first time. Read more about this in the
  [scheduling documentation][scheduling].
* Support for sending event invitations for every CalDAV client. See
  [scheduling][scheduling] for more info.
* The ZIP now has a cleaner structure. Putting all the code in `vendor/` and
  removing `lib`, for consistency.
* We now support the [jCard][jCard] format everywhere, using HTTP content
  negotation, and also in CardDAV `REPORT` requests.
* We also support vCard 4.0 everywhere! If you don't request a specific
  version, we will still return vCard 3.0 objects, but if you ask for vCard 4.0,
  we'll serve you that. Backends can store either vCard 3 or 4, and we will
  convert in between these formats as needed.
* Support for high-speed `MOVE` request. Originally `MOVE` request could be
  very sluggish, because sabredav by default will traverse an entire directory
  tree, copy every node 1-by-1 and delete the source tree afterwards. When
  your tree is database or filesystem-backed, it's often possible to do a
  really fast `MOVE`. By implementing `Sabre\DAV\IMoveTarget` you can now
  hook into this system and gain tremendous speed.

To read the full list of changes (there's quite a few!) read the changelogs:

* [sabre/dav][changelog-dav]
* [sabre/vobject][changelog-vobject]
* [sabre/event][changelog-event]
* [sabre/http][changelog-http]


API Changes and BC breaks
-------------------------

### Database structure changes

If you use the default `PDO` backend for CalDAV, you need to migrate to the
lastest database structure.

Before you start the migration process, please make a backup first! No
warranty is given for lost data.

To run the database upgrade, simply start `./bin/migrate21.php` from the SabreDAV
project. This script will give you more information about it's arguments.


### CalDAV backends have a new method

Every CalDAV backend must now implement a new method:
`getCalendarObjectByUID`. If you are not using the default PDO backend, but
created a custom backend, you must add support for this new method.

If you extended `Sabre\CalDAV\Backend\AbstractBackend`, a fallback method has
been provided. This method works, but it's very slow. For most backends its
possible to optimize this quite a bit.

Note that this is mainly used for [Scheduling][scheduling] support.


### Renamed classes

We have renamed a few classes:

1. `Sabre\CalDAV\CalendarRootNode` is renamed to `Sabre\CalDAV\CalendarRoot`.
2. `Sabre\CalDAV\UserCalendars` is renamed to `Sabre\CalDAV\CalendarHome`

The classes behave the same. The old classes still exist, but will be removed
in sabre/dav 3.0. If you instantiated any of these classes, make sure you
use the new names.


### The iMipHandler has been removed

The [imipHandler][imipHandler] has been removed entirely. This class was used
in the past to work around an iCal bug.

This bug no longer exists when a CalDAV server supports
[scheduling][scheduling], so we've also removed the workaround.

A part of its functionality was to send out email invites. This functionality
has been replaced by a new [iMip plugin][scheduling]. The benefit of this plugin, is
that it works for every caldav client, and not just broken iCal versions.


### Support for free-busy reports has moved to a new plugin

sabre/dav supported a 'freebusy' report for a long time. This report was
used by several clients, but was actually part of the [scheduling][scheduling]
specification.

Now we've fully implemented support for scheduling, and so we've also moved
the freebusy functionality.

If you need it back, make sure you enable the scheduling plugin in your
server:

    $server->addPlugin(new Sabre\CalDAV\Schedule\Plugin());


### Support for notifications has moved to a new plugin

If you wrote a CalDAV backend that supports notifications (for share invites
and replies), you need to now explictly turn on a plugin for this to work.

Before this was just part of the CalDAV plugin, but this meant that this extra
functionality was enabled, and not used for most users.

If you need it back, make sure you enable the notifications plugin in your
server:

    $server->addPlugin(new Sabre\CalDAV\Notifications\Plugin());


### vCards now return a different content-type.

When doing a `GET` request on a vCard, we always returned the following header:

    Content-Type: text/x-vcard; charset=utf-8

This was wrong. We've changed it to:

    Content-Type: text/vcard; charset=utf-8

If you relied on the old behavior, make sure you update this.


### Updating table names in PDO backends now work differently

A few people always found it important to use their own table names for the
various PDO backends, one major reason is that this would allow people to
prefix all their table names with for example `sabre_`.

This was always done by allowing people to set the various database table
names in the constructors of the various PDO backends.

This is now deprecated!

Instead you must now set the table names as public properties. The old way
using arguments still works, but will be removed in version 3.0.

Affected PDO backends:

* `Sabre\DAV\Locks\Backend\PDO`
* `Sabre\DAV\Auth\Backend\PDO`
* `Sabre\DAV\PropertyStorage\Backend\PDO`
* `Sabre\DAVACL\PrincipalBackend\PDO`
* `Sabre\CalDAV\Backend\PDO`
* `Sabre\CardDAV\Backend\PDO`


### PropertyStorage classes now have a `move` method.

If you implemented your own `Sabre\DAV\PropertyStorage\Backend` class, you must
now implement the new `move` method.

The [propertystorage][propertystorage] system allows client to store any
arbitrary propery on any resource.

One problem with this system was that it didn't handle `MOVE` requests
correctly. If a `MOVE` is done on a resource, any dead properties _must_
also be moved with it.

The new `move` method will be called when a HTTP `MOVE` is done, and allows
you to re-assign all the properties to the new location.


### Principal backends now have a `findByUri` method

If you implemented your own `PrincipalBackend` class, you must now implement
the `findByUri` method as well.

This method takes some kind of URI, such as a `mailto:` address, and returns
a local principal url.

This is used by CalDAV scheduling to deliver invites and replies to the right
user inbox.

It's possible to just return `null` from this method, but this will prevent
local invite delivery.


### ObjectTree and Tree\FileSystem classes have been removed

The `Sabre\DAV\ObjectTree` and `Sabre\DAV\Tree\FileSystem` classes both
extended `Sabre\DAV\Tree`.

This particular extension point was very rarely used. The main reason to
extend either of these classes, was to make `MOVE` operations faster.

Since 2.1, both of these classes are removed. Functionality from `ObjectTree`
has been merged into `Sabre\DAV\Tree`, which is no longer abstract.

Usually there is no need to instantiate this class directly, as it's also
created by `Sabre\DAV\Server`, but if you did use this extension point for
optimizing moves, we now recommend to implement `Sabre\DAV\IMoveTarget` in
your Collection classes instead.


### sabre/http changes

The [sabre/http][http] package has been upgraded to version 3.0. Several
BC breaking changes have been made, specifically in how methods related
to HTTP headers work.

If you ever used `Sabre\HTTP\Request` or `Sabre\HTTP\Response` objects,
you should make sure that it still works with the new behavior.

For more details, [read the blogpost][httpblogpost].


### New ZIP structure

The zip distribution now has a new directory structure. Before a part of the
source was in the `lib/` directory, and another part in the `vendor/`
directory.

We've now combined everything in the `vendor/`  directory. If you used the
composer autoloader (in `vendor/autoload.php`) you don't have to change a
thing, but if you rolled your own autoloading mechanism, you may need to
revise this.


[rfc6638]: http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6638
[scheduling]: /dav/scheduling/
[imipHandler]: /dav/imiphandler/
[jCard]: /vobject/json/
[propertystorage]: /dav/property-storage/
[http]: /http/
[httpblogpost]: /blog/2014/sabre-http-3.0.0-release/
[changelog-dav]: https://github.com/sabre-io/dav/blob/master/ChangeLog.md
[changelog-vobject]: https://github.com/sabre-io/vobject/blob/3.3.3/ChangeLog.md
[changelog-http]: https://github.com/sabre-io/http/blob/3.0.0/ChangeLog.md
[changelog-event]: https://github.com/sabre-io/http/blob/2.0.0/ChangeLog.md
