---
title: Upgrading from SabreDAV 2.1 to 3.0
layout: default
permalink: dav/upgrade/2.1-to-3.0/
---

**3.0 is currently in alpha! Don't upgrade unless you know what you are doing! **

sabre/dav 3.0 is the latest and greatest version. This release contains a lot
of incremental improvements that improve the code-base and improve
compatibility with various clients.

New features
------------

* All XML parsing code has been completely rewritten to use [sabre/xml][2].
  This created a massive reduction in code and improved legibility everywhere.
  Furthermore, it will allow us to implement new optmizations in the future
  that were not possible with the DOM.
* The [browser plugin][3] got a lot of subtle improvements, making it easier
  to use and understand the sabre/dav API.
* The authentication system got a major overhaul. There's a better separation
  of concerns, and it's now possible to use multiple authentication backends
  at the same time. (For example basic + oauth, or 2 basic plugins from two
  providers).
* The default `FSExt` classes should now be much faster, because they don't
  read entire files to calculate md5 sums anymore.
* The [iCalendar export plugin][5] got a new `componentType` parameter that
  allows to easily filter on events or tasks.
* The property storage plugin can now store *any* complex xml property,
  instead of just string values.
* A class to create a `/home`-like directory structure, with space for files
  for every user. See `Sabre\DAVACL\FS\HomeCollection`.
* It's now possible to create new principals with `MKCOL` and with the browser
  plugin if your backend supports it and if you have admin rights.


API Changes and BC breaks
-------------------------

The following few chapters detail all the BC breaking changes that have been
made. We've ordered them loosely in order of likelyhood that the changes are
relevant to you. Chances are that if you have never done any custom sabre/dav
development, only the first item might be relevant to you.

### Updated database structure

This only matters if you used the [property storage][1] PDO backend and
plugin.

Because of the changes that were made to the `propertystorage` system, a few
database changes have to be made as well. If you take advantage of the
[property storage system][1] you must run the migration script.

To do so, simply fire up:

    bin/migrateto30.php 

in your terminal. Doing so will display help information on how to do the
update. You should really make a backup first.

### Changed Authentication backend API.

This affects you if you created a custom authentication backend.

Specifically, if you extended `AbstractBasic` or `AbstractDigest`, there is
_nothing_ you have to change, but if you directly implemented
`Sabre\DAV\Auth\Backend\BackendInterface` you have to be aware there's a big
difference.

Before there was a single `authentication` method, where you had to do all
your authentication work. Now we've split that up into a `check` and
`challenge` method.

By splitting these two up, it becomes possible to use multiple authentication
backends, where each backend can make an attempt to authenticate the user.

The authentication backends can now also control the _exact_ principal that
the user will be, allowing for much more complex principal systems.

### Changed browser plugin

The browser plugin got a lot of new features, but its source also got
reorganized. If you extended the browser plugin because you wanted to add your
own branding, it will probably break.

### Removed `Sabre\DAV\Client` methods.

The following two methods were removed from `Sabre\DAV\Client`:

* `addTrustedCertificates`.
* `setVerifyPeer`.

These methods had already been deprecated a long time ago, but now they are
finally gone. To achieve the same results, it's possible to call the
`addCurlSetting` method.


### Deprecated `Sabre\DAV\Client::$propertyMap`

The `Sabre\DAV\Client::$propertyMap` property has been deprecated. It still
works and exists, but will be removed in a future version.

The property is now simply a reference to `$client->xml->elementMap`, which is
the correct way to use this feature now.


### Changed all constructors for all PDO backends

In versions before this one, it was possible to specify database table names
right in the PDO backend. This allowed you to override the default table
names.

Some of these constructors became quite large, so in version 2.1 we simply
changed all of these to public properties instead, deprecating setting these
in the constructor.

Starting 3.0 we also fully removed these. This means that if your code looked
something like this:

    $backend = new Sabre\CalDAV\Backend\PDO($pdo, 'my_calendar_table');

It must now be changed to

    $backend = new Sabre\CalDAV\Backend\PDO($pdo);
    $backend->calendarTableName = 'my_calendar_table';


### Introducing sabre/uri

sabre/dav now makes use of the new [sabre/uri][4] library. Because of this
occasion we removed the `Sabre\DAV\URIUtil` class, as all its functions were
already solved in the new library. If you used this class, take a look at the
`sabre/uri` docs to find out how to migrate.


### Renamed `UserAddressBooks`.

To improve clarity and consistency, `Sabre\CardDAV\UserAddressBooks` has been
renamed to `Sabre\CardDAV\AddressBookHome`.

If you ever needed to instantiate this class manually, make sure you change
the name.


### Changed class and interface names

Because of the introduction of [sabre/xml][2] into sabre/dav, we had to
rewrite almost every class dealing with xml code. We also took this
opportunity to improve the orginization of xml-related code.

If you've ever manually instantiated a property class, you might need to
change this to the new class name.

This is table contains _all_ the changed class names.


| Old class name                                         | New class name                                            |
| ------------------------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------- |
| `Sabre\CalDAV\Notifications\INotificationType`         | `Sabre\CalDAV\Xml\Notification\NotificationInterface`     | 
| `Sabre\CalDAV\Notifications\Notification\Invite`       | `Sabre\CalDAV\Xml\Notification\Invite`                    |
| `Sabre\CalDAV\Notifications\Notification\InviteReply`  | `Sabre\CalDAV\Xml\Notification\InviteReply`               |
| `Sabre\CalDAV\Notifications\Notification\SystemStatus` | `Sabre\CalDAV\Xml\Notification\SystemStatus`              |
| `Sabre\CalDAV\Property\AllowedSharingModes`            | `Sabre\CalDAV\Xml\Property\AllowedSharingModes`           |
| `Sabre\CalDAV\Property\EmailAddressSet`                | `Sabre\CalDAV\Xml\Property\EmailAddressSet`               |
| `Sabre\CalDAV\Property\Invite`                         | `Sabre\CalDAV\Xml\Property\Invite`                        |
| `Sabre\CalDAV\Property\ScheduleCalendarTransp`         | `Sabre\CalDAV\Xml\Property\ScheduleCalendarTransp`        |
| `Sabre\CalDAV\Property\SupportedCalendarComponentSet`  | `Sabre\CalDAV\Xml\Property\SupportedCalendarComponentSet` |
| `Sabre\CalDAV\Property\SupportedCalendarData`          | `Sabre\CalDAV\Xml\Property\SupportedCalendarData`         |
| `Sabre\CalDAV\Property\SupportedCollationSet`          | `Sabre\CalDAV\Xml\Property\SupportedCollationSet`         |
| `Sabre\CardDAV\Property\SupportedAddressData`          | `Sabre\CardDAV\Xml\Property\SupportedAddressData`         |
| `Sabre\CardDAV\Property\SupportedCollationSet`         | `Sabre\CardDAV\Xml\Property\SupportedCollationSet`        |
| `Sabre\DAV\Property`                                   | `Sabre\Xml\Element`                                       | 
| `Sabre\DAV\Property\GetLastModified`                   | `Sabre\DAV\Xml\Property\GetLastModified`                  |
| `Sabre\DAV\Property\Href`                              | `Sabre\DAV\Xml\Property\Href`                             |
| `Sabre\DAV\Property\HrefList`                          | `Sabre\DAV\Xml\Property\Href`                             |
| `Sabre\DAV\Property\IHref`                             | `Sabre\DAV\Xml\Property\Href`                             |
| `Sabre\DAV\Property\LockDiscovery`                     | `Sabre\DAV\Xml\Property\LockDiscovery`                    |
| `Sabre\DAV\Property\ResourceType`                      | `Sabre\DAV\Xml\Property\ResourceType`                     |
| `Sabre\DAV\Property\Response`                          | `Sabre\DAV\Xml\Element\Response`                          |
| `Sabre\DAV\Property\SupportedLock`                     | `Sabre\DAV\Xml\Element\SupportedLock`                     |
| `Sabre\DAV\Property\SupportedMethodList`               | `Sabre\DAV\Xml\Element\SupportedMethodList`               |
| `Sabre\DAV\Property\SupportedReportSet`                | `Sabre\DAV\Xml\Element\SupportedReportSet`                |
| `Sabre\DAVACL\Property\Acl`                            | `Sabre\DAVACL\Xml\Property\Acl`                           |
| `Sabre\DAVACL\Property\AclRestrictions`                | `Sabre\DAVACL\Xml\Property\AclRestrictions`               |
| `Sabre\DAVACL\Property\CurrentUserPrivilegeSet`        | `Sabre\DAVACL\Xml\Property\CurrentUserPrivilegeSet`       |
| `Sabre\DAVACL\Property\Principal`                      | `Sabre\DAVACL\Xml\Property\Principal`                     |
| `Sabre\DAVACL\Property\SupportedPrivilegeSet`          | `Sabre\DAVACL\Xml\Property\SupportedPrivilegeSet`         |


### Deleted deprecated classes

Because of the changed XML functionality, and because we wanted to remove code
that has been deprecated in previous versions, the following classes have been
removed from the source:

| Class name                             |
| -------------------------------------- |
| `Sabre\CalDAV\CalendarQueryParser`     |
| `Sabre\CalDAV\CalendarRootNode`        |
| `Sabre\CalDAV\UserCalendars`           |
| `Sabre\CardDAV\AddressBookQueryParser` |
| `Sabre\DAV\Exception\FileNotFound`     |
| `Sabre\DAV\Locks\Backend\FS`           |
| `Sabre\DAV\PartialUpdate\IFile`        |
| `Sabre\DAV\Property\ResponseList`      |


### XML Api changes

If you ever manually wrote or parsed xml or made your own custom properties,
this might be relevant to you.

Before you could set your own custom xml namespaces with the `xmlNamespaces`
property on the server class. This has now changed.

If your code was:

    $server->xmlNamespaces['http://example.org/ns'] = 'ex';

It should now be:

    $server->xml->namespaceMap['http://example.org/ns'] = 'ex';

If you had any custom complex properties, you need to make a similar change:

Old:

    $server->propertyMap['{http://example.org/ns}element'] = 'MyElement';

New:

    $server->xml->elementMap['{http://example.org/ns}element'] = 'MyElement';


### `FSExt` no longer stores custom properties.

Because a few versions ago, the [property storage][1] plugin was introduced,
it was no longer deemed needed to also store custom properties in these
classes:

* `Sabre\DAV\FSExt\Directory`
* `Sabre\DAV\FSExt\File`

If you do need similar behavior, set up the [property storage][1] plugin. No
way has been provided to migrate this data though, if you do really need this,
we'll be happy to help you do it. Contact us on the mailing list.


### Creating custom collections

If you call `$server->createCollection()`, or if you have a custom class
implementing `Sabre\DAV\IExtendedCollection`, be aware that instead of a list
of properties, you will now receive a `Sabre\DAV\MKCol` object.

This object works really similarly to `Sabre\DAV\PropPatch` and allows plugins
to intercept specific properties when "extended `MKCOL`" requests are being
made.

This was critical for ensuring that the property storage plugin could behave
as expected for `MKCOL`.


### The `report` event changed.

Before 3.0, the `report` event handlers would get an instance of the
`DOMDocument` representing the report. Now they receive the parsed output
from `sabre/xml` instead.

Going into this is a bit too much for this guide. If you are one of the really
few that actually used this event, drop us a line. We'd be more than happy to
make time for you and help you upgrade.

[1]: /dav/property-storage/
[2]: /xml/
[3]: /dav/browser-plugin/
[4]: /uri/
[5]: /dav/ics-export-plugin/
[changelog-dav]: https://github.com/fruux/sabre-dav/blob/master/ChangeLog.md
[changelog-vobject]: https://github.com/fruux/sabre-vobject/blob/3.3.3/ChangeLog.md
[changelog-http]: https://github.com/fruux/sabre-http/blob/3.0.0/ChangeLog.md
[changelog-event]: https://github.com/fruux/sabre-http/blob/2.0.0/ChangeLog.md
