---
title: Upgrading from SabreDAV 3.0 to 3.1
layout: default
permalink: dav/upgrade/3.0-to-3.1/
---

sabre/dav 3.1 has been released, and with it there's a few new features and
a few backwards compability breaks.
 
Unlike other major releases, 3.1 is a smaller update and upgrading to it
should be relatively painless for most people.

New features
------------

* This is the first sabre/dav release to support PHP 7. Previous versions had
  some compatibility issues that have now been solved.
* We've switched to [sabre/vobject][1] version 4, which has a lot of
  improvements itself.
* Support for [calendar-availability][3]. CalDAV clients that support this
  specification will allow users to specify what their working hours are, and
  this information will automatically be kept into consideration when
  generating freebusy requests. To use this, just make sure you have enabled
  the [property storage][4] plugin on your CalDAV server.
* There's a new authenticatation backend for people implementing OAuth2 Bearer
  token. It's not a full OAuth2 authentication system, but it does make it a
  bit easier for people looking to implement that.
* Lots of memory-usage improvements all around, especially when dealing with
  CalDAV and CardDAV `REPORT` requests.
* Lots of new exceptions and improvements to error messaging for edge-cases
  people have run into.

That's the most important stuff, but there's lots of smaller tweaks and
improvements that hopefully result in an (even) more stable product.

For a full list of changes, consult the [changelog][5].


API Changes and BC breaks
-------------------------

The following few chapters detail all the BC breaking changes that have been
made. We've ordered them loosely in order of likelyhood that the changes are
relevant to you. Chances are that if you have never done any custom sabre/dav
development, only the first item might be relevant to you.


### Dropped PHP 5.4 support

PHP 5.4 is officially no longer supported by the PHP group, and we've also
dropped support for it. We're taking advantage of several PHP 5.5 features,
and as a result PHP 5.4 will no longer work.

If you are still running PHP 5.4, be sure to update. We'll keep supporting
sabre/dav 3.0 for 12 months though and fix any bugs that crop up.


### We're using sabre/vobject 4

Previous sabre/dav versions used sabre/vobject 3. Version 4 of this library
has several BC breaking changes itself, which can affect you if you use
sabre/dav and do things with the sabre/vobject library yourself.

To help you upgrade your code to sabre/vobject 4, there is a [separate
documentation page][2] describing the exact changes.

### Exception changes in `Sabre\DAV\Client`.

The Client class will now through `Sabre\HTTP\ClientHttpException` in both
the `propFind()` and `propPatch()` methods in case a HTTP error was returned.

Before `propFind()` used `Sabre\DAV\Exception`, and `propPatch()` didn't throw
any exceptions at all.

`propPatch()` will now also throw `Sabre\HTTP\ClientException` in case other
probles arise with the request.

[1]: /vobject/
[2]: /vobject/upgrade_to_4/
[3]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-daboo-calendar-availability-05
[4]: /dav/property-storage/
[5]: https://github.com/fruux/sabre-dav/blob/3.1.0/CHANGELOG.md
